## Multi-decadal changes in structural complexity following mass coral mortality on a Caribbean reef
*George Roff*, *Jennifer Joseph*, *Peter J. Mumby*

Biogeosciences, 17, 5909–5918

https://doi.org/10.5194/bg-17-5909-2020

To assess changes in rugosity at the colony scale in the 2 decades following the mass mortality, we created a structural model of O. annularis colonies that was parameterized using field data collected at Long Caye. The surface structural complexity of O. annularis colonies was modelled using a simple cross-sectional topography of ramets and colony widths (Fig. 4a, see R code in the Supplement). Colony widths were determined from in situ measurements of 95 colonies at Long Caye in 2000, and ramet heights (from the top to the base of the ramet within colonies) and widths were measured from 30 ramets within colonies in 2000 (Roff et al., 2015). The model simulates 1000 colonies of O. annularis, randomly sampling from colony width measurements, and uses measurements of ramet diameter and ramet spacing to determine the number of ramets within colonies. Prior to the 1998 mortality event, the ratio of live to dead ramets within colonies was determined from surveys of pre-disturbance O. annularis in 1998, where 97.8 % of O. annularis ramets were alive (Roff et al., 2015). The ratio of live to dead ramets 20 years after the 1998 mortality event was determined from surveys of 25 colonies of O. annularis at Long Caye in 2018. Surviving ramets were subject to annual linear extension (sampled at random from CT-scan-derived skeletal growth measurements at Long Caye between 2006 and 2011; Roff et al., 2015), whereas dead ramets underwent annual external linear bioerosion (sampled at random from U–Th-derived measurements of O. annularis at Long Caye between 1998 and 2011; Roff et al., 2015). Annual changes in structural complexity within each simulated colony between 1998 and 2018 was measured using the rugosity index (R; Alvarez-Filip et al., 2009), which is a ratio between the width of the colony and the external surface (i.e. the sum of ramet height, ramet width, and inter-ramet spacing). Correlations between changes in rugosity (1998–2018) and colony width, post-bleaching survival, and both the number of live and dead ramets within simulated colonies was determined using Pearson's product moment correlation coefficient (ρ) with the cor.test function (“stats” package) in R (R Core Team, 2019)
